---
layout: post
title:  Facebook Outage
date: 2021-10-06
category: logs
---
Facebook suffered a major [outage](https://engineering.fb.com/2021/10/04/networking-traffic/outage/) on Oct 4. The outage affected all well-known services Facebook offers: Instgram, Whatsapp and facebook.com. On top of that it has been reported that it affected Facebook's internal systems ranging from network management to electronic door locks. Apps remained down ([check this report](https://www.thousandeyes.com/blog/facebook-outage-analysis)) for seven hours.

It became quickly known that some routes had been withdrawn from BGP preventing Internet clients to know where FB's DNS servers were located. BGP and DNS together create a phonebook of the Internet. Whereas BGP carries the number information, DNS resolves the number to an address. It's easier to browse for a name than for a number if you have ever browsed through a phonebook. 

If you have paid attention to these global incidents the most common case nominators are BGP and DNS. Disrupting either one of those will bring an operation to a halt. 

Facebook claimed that the cause was a BGP configuration error which in my opinion is a plausible explanation. It's pretty common mistake to either produce an error, add more than needed or delete something that you should've not deleted from the BGP table. On the protocol level BGP may be one of the most complicated and versatile networking protocols out there. It is backed by the fact that it's trained only in the advanced / expert level certifications. That's why people (sometimes) struggle with it.

Due to COVID shutdowns admins are also sitting at home relying on remote connections to manage their environments. So if the remote management connections come through a VPN carried over Internet, you won't have an way to remotely rollback the change that caused the outage. That's why for recovery purposes you should always design a secure back-up connection that uses a different connection. Without it the recovery process has to be done on site which also becomes an issues if you can't access the data center due to locks being also affected by the outage. At the time of writing, I haven't found the reason why Facebook's design was done this way.

Also against the typical practise of major companies (such as Amazon) storing their DNS records externally in at least two different DNS services, Facebook has chosen to rely on their own infrastructure. This makes Facebook's DNS very interesting target for attackers but also a major single point of failure. Although it may be a more potent solution in terms of convergence, using this approach Facebook can't assure connectivity to its services if their DNS is down.

What was curious but also expected was that there were problems in the Internet traffic overall as many DNS queries were dropped and many more were generated by the clients trying to use Facebook's services. An incident that started from a single major organization became an incident that produced networking issues all over Internet.