---
layout: post
title:  Soft Targets Are The Best
date: 2022-04-01
category: logs
---

Kaspersky’s software has been marked as a national security threat by US FCC. Although technologically capable software it has had some political spins around it during the past years. Much like in Huawei’s case worries of a conflict of interest carried by Kaspersky’s senior leadership is behind this. It’s typical to see this flag raised if the company’s senior leadership has had something to do with either intelligence or defense sector of the host country. 
 
Few days back a massive Chrome related Zero Day vulnerability was published. Google issued an emergency patch affecting 3.2 billion users to fix this single vulnerability. If you’ve been following the industry during the recent years, it’s not surprising to hear that the vulnerable technology was JavaScript. As JavaScript is executed on the client device after downloading a web page, it’s prime candidate to send something malicious to a user that executes unless there a controls in place in the browser (note: this same structural weakness applies to Whatsapp and other apps that receive and execute without users approval). Chrome vulnerabilities are problematic because most modern browsers are in fact based on Chromium – open-source Chrome. Keep browsers up to date and if possible run extensions like “noscript” to take control what your browser is allowed to execute without your intervention. 
 
In the end of 2019, we started to expect a massive flood of cyber-attacks as people moved to work from home and new attack surface was exposed. Although it’s not the same type of activity and volume as we’ve seen in Ukraine, we now have some insights to what happened for instance in 2021. FBI reports altogether 649 critical infrastructure networks that were breached during the year. Cold observations are: 1) that only covers US, 2) that’s two networks each day – how to keep up with the pace repairing and updating, 3) those are the critical networks, 4) ransomware was the main tool, 5) three top threat actors – Conti (also in Ukraine), LockBit and Revil. Target was often healthcare sector. Why? Taking down technology takes the risk to losing human lives (i.e. high interest to pay the ransom) and often poor protection compared to criticality. These two alone make healthcare a big fat target.
 
This said, FBI also reported that they see increasingly active reconnaissance (i.e. service enumeration and port scanning) from Russia towards energy companies and their networks. As a textbook example this should be interpreted as a precursor of an exploitation attempt. At minimum we should recognize that the risk of a potential attack on energy sector has risen due to this activity. Keep an eye on DNS systems to see an increase on resolve requests. Especially Zone Transfer requests or word list scans should mean something to you. In addition, check Firewall and for instance email server logs to figure out if there are port scans ongoing. 
 
Although criminals form the Lapsu$ group have been arrested, the group is still active and gaining victories. It’s now known that they were able to extract a file called “DomAdmins-LastPass.xlsx” from one of the breached laptops of previously hacked companies. As a single finding this is not perhaps significant but opens an interesting discussion: Why was the password database from LastPass application exported to an Excel? Remember to use password managers, but realize that it’s not enough if someone shares your database in Excel. That’s why the best practice is to use individual databases and only share entries. Never decrypt your database or share your master password with anyone. Then it’s another discussion altogether when organizations either by purpose or by mistake share and use same credentials with different admins. 
 
Ukrainian ISP Ukrtelecom which is used by the local military was able to defend against a ‘powerful’ attack. The attacker (most likely Russia, speculation) was able to interfere production but Ukrtelecom was still able to produce service to military and other critical users by prioritizing that over other users. It’s known that the attack was targeted mostly on their core infrastructure but what actually took place is unclear (personally I couldn’t find an accurate explanation). Similar type of an attack was done against another UA ISP called Triolan earlier in March. In any conflict (seen it with own eyes in Africa and now in Ukgraine) an ISP is to expect for an attack. Looking from the other side, as an ISP client you may want to diversify your means of connectivity as a contingency.
