---
layout: post
title:  Wild West
date: 2022-03-21
category: logs
---
Last week we saw a targeted supply chain malware attack. In short a Javascript package called node-ipc was used to target host IPs of Russian and Belarussian origin. This package is vastly popular piece of software with millions of weekly downloads. After installation on those hosts through normal package manager operation the malware embedded in the node-ipc package wiped out the data and overwrote all files on the targeted computers. This attack resembles the odd case of CCleaner few years back. For a long period of time there has been an atmosphere that open source software is by default secure since it’s open to a wide community of developers. Not taking a stance for or against, I just point out that not doing your own code analysis is a dangerous mindset.
 
Previously, I reported on the malware called Cyclops Blink – a malware that targets opensource network OS’s running on PowerPC. Malware seems to have evolved to a botnet that comprises of the malware’s targets that are mainly SoHo routers. The C2 network have been reported to be massive covering more than 150 addresses.
 
Phishing attacks are reported to be evolving at the moment. No longer clumsy email spamming, the attackers are focusing on gaining access to legitimate email accounts and using them to hijack real communications. Phishing still is the best bang for the buck and provides the point of escalation for further attacks. It’s important to keep it on the radar. Good old mechanisms like strong password policy (see NIST) and MFA should provide protection while monitoring user activity logs (especially for new locations) should add to detection layer.
 
In the past years’ it’s been under debate who is to defend nations critical infra – companies and organizations themselves or authorities. It’s been a problematic topic because while companies own the infra it’s often the society that bears the damage (I mean people). US Senate has asked for a detailed explanation from US Department of Homeland Security that should cover this long debated question. Ideally this should provide clarity for all societies.
 
Going back to Nvidia case that gained attention few weeks back: It seems that malware are now being signed using Nvidia’s stolen signatures. This is problematic to say the least.
